Hear the word of the Lord.
After this, Joseph was told, behold, your father is ill.
So he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, and he was told to Jacob, your son Joseph has come to you.
Then Israel summoned his strength and sat up in bed, and Jacob said to Joseph, God Almighty appeared to me at loose in the land of Canaan and blessed me.
and said to me, behold, I will make you fruitful and multiply you, and I will make you a company of peoples and will give you this land to your offspring after you for an everlasting possession.
And now, your two sons who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt are mine.
Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine as Reuben and Simeon are.
And the children that you fathered after them shall be yours.
They shall be called by the name of their brothers and their inheritance.
As for me, when I came from Padan to my sorrow, Rachel died in the land of Canaan on the way, when there was still some distance to go to Ephraath, and I buried her there on the way to Ephraath.
That is Bethlehem.
When Israel saw Joseph's sons, he said, who are these?
Joseph said to his father, they are my sons whom God has given me here.
And he said, bring them to me, please, that I may bless them.
Now, the eyes of Israel were dim with age.
so that he could not see.
So Joseph brought them near him and he kissed them and embraced them.
And Israel said to Joseph, I never expected to see your face and behold, God has let me see your offspring also.
Then Joseph removed them from his knees and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand towards Israel's left hand.
and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand and brought them near him.
And Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it on the head of Ephraim who was the younger.
And his left hand on the head of Manasseh crossing his hands from Manasseh was the firstborn.
And he blessed Joseph and said, The God before whom my father's Abraham and Isaac walked.
The God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day.
The angel who has redeemed me from all evil, blessed the boys, and in them let my name be carried on in the name of my father's Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand on the head of Ephraim, it displeased him.
And he took his father's hand to move it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head, and Joseph said to his father, not this way, my father, since this one is the firstborn.
Put your right hand on his head.
but his father refused and said, I know my son, I know.
He shall also become a great people and he shall also be great.
Nevertheless, his younger brother shall be greater than he and his offspring shall become a multitude of nations.
So he blessed them that day saying, by you Israel will pronounce a blessing saying, God made you as Ephraim and as Manasseh.
Thus he put Ephraim before Manasseh.
Then Israel said to Joseph, Behold, I am about to die, but God will be with you and will bring you again to the land of your fathers.
Moreover, I have given to you rather than to your brothers one mountain slope that I took from the hand of the Amorites with my sword and with my bow.
Friends, the grass withers and the flowers fade, but the word of our God will stand forever.
And you may be seated.
Would you please pray with me?
Blessed and merciful Father, creator of heaven and earth, as we turn now to the preaching of Your Word, we remember that we are people who are entirely dependent upon You.
Lord, we need Your Spirit to come and to speak to us through Your Word.
We need you to do what no preacher can do and what no hero can do.
Would you please bring your word to life this morning that we would hear from you?
All glory be to you, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.
Amen.
Friends, what is the mark that you want to leave on the world?
I'm not just asking as Pastor Craig asked last week, what do you want people to say at your funeral?
That might be the answer.
But I mean, after you've been gone for 100 years, what mark do you hope to have made upon the world?
Maybe it's your children and your children's children and your children's children's children and so on and so on.
Maybe it's your job.
We have a school, we employ educators at this school.
So maybe your hope is that I'm gonna impact the next generation and they'll be formed.
Maybe you have hopes and aspirations of running a business, forming some other institution, a hospital, that has a resounding impact that goes on and out way after you are gone.
But what is the impact that you hope to make
on the world.
My guess is that you all have something.
It's one of my really fun things about my job, working for a manual as I get to sit down with high school, usually juniors and seniors, and talk to them about the next steps of their life.
What does that look like as they're going out into the world?
What are they passionate about?
What do they hope to be able to do?
How do they want to make an impact on their life?
And yet this looks different at every age.
On average, the average American person in their career field changes their career eight times in the life of working.
At each one of those breaks, if your identity is in your job in your career, you have to be wondering, what impact can I possibly make?
As you step away from the career field, what impact am I making?
The point is, friends, we want to have an impact
that actually lasts.
We want to leave a lasting mark on society.
This is really what this text answers today.
This is the question that it answers.
What can we leave that lasts?
And we'll see this answered in three movements.
First, the covenant heritage versus one through seven.
The covenant identity versus eight through 16, and covenant promises versus 17 through 22.
What can we leave that lasts?
Covenant heritage, covenant identity, and covenant promises.
Just a quick note before we move into the text.
As Pastor Craig mentioned last week, these next few chapters are actually pretty difficult to find good scholarly work on,
to find people who have preached through them.
In fact, most of the commentaries that I was looking at suggested, if you're going to handle Genesis 48, you might as well throw it together with 49 and 50, do it all in one thing, move on.
So over the next couple of weeks, we're going to be slowing down and looking at passages that it's not the norm to do this with.
They are kind of fly over texts.
As we get to the end of Genesis, you're like 49 chapters in, you're so close to finishing, and you just cruise right on through.
And I imagine this is often what happens sometimes with pastors, and they've been preaching through the book of Genesis, sometimes for years, and they have a chance to kind of condense things together a little bit, so they move pretty quickly.
So our passage today, we're breaking it up into these three sections, because I really think there are these three sections that are helpful for us to understand and processing through.
But really what we're going to do through these three sections is we're gonna look at what's happening through the eyes, try to relate and understand the three different character groups that we see.
So in our first movement, we're gonna look at Jacob, try to understand Jacob's role in this first movement.
So I invite you to look at your text here, chapter 48, verse one.
After this, Joseph was told,
Behold, your father is ill." So he took with him his two sons, Vanessa and Ephraim, and he was told to Jacob, your son Joseph has come to you.
Then Israel summoned his strength and sat up in bed.
You'll notice Moses here switches back and forth between Jacob and Israel.
I don't think, and the vast majority of commentators agree, there's not any particular reason to what's going on there.
We ought not.
Look at when the different names are used and read them as though they are separate things or identifying different aspects of the same person.
Rather, we just understand that this is the person who has two names.
And so sometimes he's called one name and sometimes he's called the other name.
And Moses freely interchanges between them in his writing here.
So as we read, Jacob is dying and Israel sits up in bed.
It's the same person.
It's not two aspects of one man.
But notice the setting that Moses gives for us here.
Joseph hears that his father is dying.
So Joseph grabs his two sons and books it.
I mean, he gets there so quickly that the messenger that was just like told to go tell him doesn't make it back to let Jacob know that he's on his way.
He beats the messenger so that someone has to say, your son got here and he's not even expected.
So Jacob then,
summoned his strength to sit up in bed.
And this tells us everything that we need to know about the health status of the patriarch here.
When it requires a summoning of strength to sit up in bed, the end is near.
I don't know how many of you have ever been bedside with someone in their last hours or their last days.
But if you've been there, then you understand what this is.
The gathering of themselves to make meaningful eye contact.
The pause for a second of a deep breath to squeeze a hand or to mouth, I love you.
Jacob gathers his strength here because he still has work to do for his family.
I want you to hear what he says as he gathers his strength up.
We're here in verse three now.
And Jacob said to Joseph, God Almighty appeared to me at loose in the land of Canaan and blessed me and said to me, Behold, I will make you fruitful and multiply you and I will make you a company of peoples and will give this land to your offspring after you for an everlasting possession.
And now you're two sons who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt are mine.
Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine as Reuben and Simeon are.
Try to put yourself in Jacob's shoes for just a moment.
I understand that we can't fully do that.
But if you think of the last things that you get to say to someone,
You summon your strength to sit up in bed, to communicate what we do in our culture is a goodbye, right?
I mean, this is typically what people do.
They reiterate on their deathbed, I want you to know how much I love you.
Never forget that we love you, that we care about you.
And this is a thing that we try to pass on, generation to generation.
but not so with Jacob.
It's not that Jacob doesn't love Joseph.
Joseph knows that his father loves him.
That's not what Jacob is wanting to pass on.
That's not what he's giving to his son that lasts, but he's giving him is a covenant heritage.
He says with his last few words, he continues on in the next chapter, but the last
Several words that he's saying, he communicates, this is who our God is.
The God of my father and my father's father, who's given us a promise, this is who our God is and your sons are now like my sons.
I have adopted them.
He says in verse six, he continues,
And the children that you fathered after them shall be yours.
They shall be called by the name of their brothers and their inheritance."
This is weird to us.
We have a hard time understanding what this means.
We have a whole legal apparatus for adoption.
If you have questions about it, I'm sure that Ryan would love to answer them after service.
We have a whole way that this works.
And here's how it doesn't work.
It doesn't look like a grandfather on his deathbed saying, you know what?
Your two kids are actually mine now.
I can claim them.
That's not the way that our society functions, but it's perfectly appropriate here.
The patriarch looks at his son and says, those boys are mine.
They're equivalent to my sons and other kids that you have in the future.
Fine, they're yours, that's okay.
But these boys are mine.
Verse seven, ask for me when I came to Badan to my sorrow.
Rachel died in a land of Canaan on the way.
When there was still some distance to go to Ephraeth, and I buried her there on my way to Ephraeth, that is Bethlehem.
And it is as though with those few words, God appearing to him, his wife dying.
Jacob has rehearsed his entire life to his son.
This is what he wants his son to carry on to remember.
Remember who our God is and remember that I loved your mother.
And that's what he gives to his son.
Friends, what is it that you're hoping to pass down to the next generation?
What do you want to give to your children?
What do you want to give to the people that you get to interact with who are not your children?
Perhaps you're single here this morning.
So was Paul.
He calls Timothy his son in the faith.
So, assuredly, we don't get to sidestep that for lack of a spouse.
Or maybe you are married and you don't have children.
The question still stands.
What do you hope to pass on to the next generation?
It is my prayer, friends, that this is what we ultimately think about passing down to the next generation.
Our covenant heritage.
This is who our God is.
This is what he has accomplished for us.
It means so much more than the way that we typically think about inheritance.
Land, material stuff, investments, a good work ethic.
We have a covenant heritage that we can pass on to the next generation.
And that is something that lasts.
It's why we started a school.
We want to pass on a covenant heritage.
That's what Jacob shows us here in this text.
Friends, is this not what God does for us?
That he identifies us as his, that he gives us something we don't have any claim to?
That he establishes who he has always been and who we will always be to remind us
and comfort us.
And so, this is what we ought to do as well.
Not because Jacob did it, because this is how God acts.
He gives us a covenant heritage.
What can we leave that lasts?
We can leave a covenant heritage.
Now, second, a covenant identity, verses eight through 16.
When Israel saw Joseph's sons, he said, who are these?
Joseph said to his father, they are my sons whom God has given me here.
And he said, bring them to me, please, that I may bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim with age so that he could not see.
So Joseph brought them near him and he kissed them and embraced them.
And Israel said to Joseph, I never expected to see your face.
And behold, God has let me see your offspring also.
Friends, this is an incredibly touching scene.
I hope that you can feel the emotion of it in spite of some of its familiarity.
A man who is blinded with age, you know, he's 147 years old.
Says to his beloved son, Joseph, I never thought I would see you again.
And now I'm beholding your children.
What a tremendous blessing that this is to Jacob, that these boys are to him.
What a kindness that God has given to him.
So he claims these boys as though they were his own, because in a manner of speaking, he lost Joseph.
To be sure, Joseph is still his son.
But in what way does Joseph actually need Jacob?
And what way does he need a father to provide for him in the way that a father would typically provide?
And the answer is he doesn't.
In fact, we see Joseph now providing for Jacob.
We see this inversion that happened in this last chapter.
And so he brings these sons to him and he rejoices in verse 11, and Israel said to Joseph, I never expected to see your face.
Then Joseph removed them from his knees and he bowed himself with his face toward the earth.
And Joseph took them both Ephraim in his right hand towards Israel's left hand.
And Manasseh in his left hand towards Israel's right hand and brought them near him.
And Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it on the head of Ephraim who was the younger and the left hand on the head of Manasseh, crossing his hands for Manasseh was the firstborn.
Okay.
It goes into great detail here.
And I hope you can picture this in your mind.
These sons are brought and Joseph and Jacob are facing each other, right?
So one's left is the other one's right and one's right is the other one's left.
And these boys are put in front of Jacob to bless by Joseph.
And Joseph understands the cultural standards and what happens.
He gets in a way that we don't understand that somehow the blessing of the right hand is more significant than the blessing of the left hand.
And there's something going on there.
And so he puts the boys where they're supposed to be in good and proper order, the oldest one on the right, the youngest one on the left.
But then Jacob does what we wouldn't expect.
Sorry about that beard hair and the mic.
Jacob also understands the cultural expectations.
But he understands something that Joseph doesn't.
In some prophetic way that we don't have record of, Jacob knows that God is going to bless Ephraim, more than Manasseh.
And so he reverses his hands and he gives this blessing to the boys.
Verse 15, and he blessed Joseph and said,
The God before whom my father's Abraham and Isaac walked.
The God who has been my shepherd all my lifelong to this day.
The angel who has redeemed me from all evil, blessed the boys, and in them let my name be carried on.
And the name of my father's Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
These boys are not really boys.
If you remember from last week, Pastor Craig was talking about the 17 years that had passed since Jacob had come into the land of Egypt.
And we know that these boys were born sometime in this seven year period of prosperity, then there's these two years of famine and then Jacob shows up.
So if we do the math, they're at least 19 years old.
Perhaps as old as 26.
somewhere in that range, which makes the reading of this even stranger, right?
This blessing makes a ton of sense if we're talking about like a toddler or a baby or a small child, but these are not malleable children.
These are men who have been raised in Pharaoh's household to be sure they are grandsons of Jacob, but they're also grandsons of
priestess of a pagan god.
These are Egyptian boys with Egyptian names raised in an Egyptian culture eating Egyptian food.
They wore Egyptian clothes.
They smelled like Egyptians.
They were, for all intents and purposes, Egyptians.
Now, to be sure, we know that Joseph has been practicing his faith so we can
be certain that he is raising his sons in accordance with his faith.
But the culture all around them was Egyptian.
How bizarre, how strange that when Jacob is promising where his line will continue, he says, yeah, those two Egyptian boys.
They're the ones that are gonna carry out my line.
And of course, we know that that's not Jacob's words deciding that.
He is prophesying.
And so it makes it even stranger that God would say, you know how I'm going to fulfill my purpose?
Yeah, that's right.
Through those two, not the insiders, the outsiders.
Friends, like I said, in the second point, you understand the role of the boys because this is us.
You see this?
This is us.
We're those outside of the covenant community brought in to the covenant community.
By the beloved Son brought to the Father that He would embrace us and adopt us and bless us.
To be sure, not physically brought near, but in Christ's life, death, burial, resurrection, and ascension, we are brought to the Father and adopted into His family.
We who are outside now been brought in.
This is what God accomplishes for us.
He gives us a new identity, a covenant identity.
Identity that is based on him and what he has done and not ourselves.
One quick aside, and it isn't aside, so I'm actually going to step aside.
If you look ahead in verse 20, we already read it and talked about this, or read it at least.
In verse 20, we will talk about this.
You see that there's a blessing that's given.
And this blessing is actually still given today by
practicing Jews by devoted Jews, they give their son this blessing every Friday, this continual ongoing ritualistic rite that they have every Friday, they bless their sons, saying they would be as Manasseh and Ephraim.
And the reason why they do that is because they pick up on a theme that starts in the very beginning of Genesis and actually comes to a head here.
You see, Manasseh and Ephraim,
are the first brothers that we ever see that don't compete with each other.
So even though this blessing is reversed and we would seem that you would have a brother who feels jilted or a brother who feels prideful or anger, there'd be this fighting going on, we don't see any of that.
Finally stopping this generational feud between brothers that was going on since Cain and Abel, we don't see that.
I do think we're supposed to see ourselves in the text here in this movement as the brothers that are brought near to the father and adopted into his family by the beloved son.
I think we're supposed to see ourselves here.
I also think, perhaps, maybe that we should consider the unity and the accord that these brothers had with one another.
Christ said that they will know that you are my followers, by your love,
for one another.
So friends, would that be what marks us?
If there is any in the church or Christians outside of the church that you have conflict with, I would implore you.
Try to make that right.
Do not let that fester.
Because of the identity that you have, because of the identity the other person has, because you belong to the same covenant, you can work towards peace.
When that is secure, we can establish peace and forgiveness.
What can we leave that lasts?
We can leave a covenant heritage, a covenant identity, and now finally, verse 17, covenant promises.
When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand on the head of Ephraim, it displeased him.
And he took his father's hand to move it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head.
And Joseph said to his father, not this way, my father, since this one is the first one, put your right hand on his head.
You guys see what's happening?
You understand?
As we think about Joseph here in this situation, again, I think we're supposed to see in this movement here and understand that we are often Joseph.
actually not so well-equipped.
Remember, Jacob is blind.
He doesn't recognize the human beings that are brought in front of him.
He actually can't see who's who.
And so as he crosses his hands, Joseph might be thinking, oh, no, dad, dad, dad, dad, you don't understand.
It's this one.
This is the one.
Maybe he thinks that his dad is senile,
Who knows?
But here's what we do know.
Joseph has perfectly good working eyes.
Joseph was the one who actually had the foresight for in the seven years of plenty to save up enough grain so that, I don't know, all of Egypt and really the known world around there could not starve to death and die.
Pretty good.
Think of what Joseph accomplished in the last chapter.
All of the known wealth in the area, all of the material money people had to spend, they came to Egypt and they gave it to Joseph.
And then all of the herds, they came to Egypt and they gave them to Joseph.
And then in perpetuity, a 20% tax forever and ever on all of the land, they came and they gave it to Joseph.
Now he's not collecting it for himself, he's collecting it for Pharaoh.
But the point stands, there is no one else in this room who
is so well equipped to be able to handle a situation.
And yet he's wrong.
The other option of what could be going on here, it's possible.
Maybe Joseph is remembering his father's previous betrayals.
His father's a trickster, a manipulator, a liar, someone who says the thing that's convenient rather than the thing that's true.
who say whatever it takes to get his way.
So maybe Joseph is seeing his father act and is saying, no, dad, no.
In fact, in here when he says the father laid his right hand on the head of Ephraim, it displeased him.
Some translations say it was evil in his sight.
So maybe he's reacting to this thing where he thinks his father is again being manipulative.
Or maybe he just thinks that his dad's wrong and he knows better.
Joseph is actually being very reasonable, very reasonable.
And we do this too.
We question things.
We wonder, again, I think very often we're not half this reasonable.
But when God crosses his hands in the pouring out of blessings in our life, when it's not the way that we would have written it, not the way that we expect it, we question.
And look at how
God through Jacob answers Joseph.
Look at the tenderness.
But his father refused and said, I know my son, I know.
He also shall become a people and he also shall be great.
Nevertheless, his younger brother shall be greater than he.
And his offspring shall become a multitude of nations.
So he blessed them that day saying, by you, Israel will pronounce blessing saying, God make you as Ephraim and Manasseh.
Thus he put Ephraim before Manasseh.
Then Israel said to Joseph, behold, I am about to die, but God will be with you.
And we'll bring you again to the land of your fathers.
Moreover, I have given to you, rather than to your brothers, one mountain slope that I took from the hand of the Amorites with my sword and with my bow."
He doesn't withhold a blessing.
He comforts his son.
He reminds his son of how great the blessing of both of his children will be.
And then he boos beyond that and blesses his son.
Reminds him of who his God and father is and said, and I'm giving you this particular slope.
Before I start handing out stuff to your brothers, which is what happens in the next chapter, Joseph, I'm giving you this land right here, this slope that I won myself.
I think often we can have an idea and a concern that we can't question things, that we can't ask questions, that we can't actually wrestle with things that are real and troublesome and problematic.
Because if we do, God's gonna smite us, or that God can't hold up to our real questionings,
And so we end up believing that what we have to do is believe things blindly or deconstruct our Christianity.
Beloved of God, that is not the picture that the Bible paints.
Friends, you, like Joseph, can ask the hard questions.
Joseph tries to correct his father in the midst of him prophesying.
It's okay to have questions, to wrestle with things, to bring them to God, that God could again encourage us of the promises that He has for us, because that is what lasts.
It transcends the struggles that we have, the questions that we wrestle with on a day to day base of God.
If you're real, why would you not stop this?
The promises that God gives are true forever and ever in a way that that situation is not.
And if you know saints who have suffered and lived long lives, then you know they will tell you again and again.
They had no idea what God was doing.
And they look back in retrospect and they see clearly and they can give thanks to God for things that they groaned over.
Not all things, but certainly the majority.
Friends, these are the things that last.
What can we leave that lasts?
We can leave a covenant heritage, a covenant identity, covenant promises.
These are things that Christ has given to us.
We've inherited a heritage that establishes our identity.
We have access to God's promises.
So because of this, friends, I pray that you
would again dedicate yourself to the mark that you want to make on the world, that you would go out and do those things so that you can leave a covenant heritage, a covenant identity, and covenant promises.
Would you please pray with me?
God of all mercy and grace, Lord, we thank you for your word
We thank you how you point us to Christ.
We thank you for your gospel, that you bring us near to you who have no claim on you, that you give us a new identity, that you adopt us to sons and daughters, that you then empower us to go out, to bring others into your kingdom, to bring your kingdom about on earth as it is in heaven.
We thank you for this privilege.
We pray that you would strengthen us to this end.
We ask this in Christ's name.
Amen.